[[!tag "HP Notes"]]
[[!meta title="Ginny Weasley"]]
[[!toc levels=2 startlevel=3]]


### Snippet analysis

> “There’s room in this one, there’s only Loony Lovegood in here — ”
> 
> Neville mumbled something about not wanting to disturb anyone. 
> 
> “Don’t be silly,” said Ginny, laughing, “she’s all right.” 
> 
> She slid the door open and pulled her trunk inside it. Harry and Neville
> followed. 
> 
> “Hi, Luna,” said Ginny. “Is it okay if we take these seats?”[^20210513-3]

This is probably the most troublesome thing that Ginny says in the entire
series.  It is also the biggest counter example to trying to deal with the next
quote.  The only interesting thing is that while Ginny uses the name "Loony"
outside the compartment, she switches to "[[Luna]]" as soon as they go in, and
immediately strikes up a friendly conversation with the outcast girl.  This is
not in character for someone who uses derogatory names.  The contradiction in
Ginny's behaviour is unexplained, to my knowledge, by cannon sources. 

> “Oh, for heaven’s sake, Harry, you can do better than her, ” said Hermione.
> “Ginny’s told me all about her, apparently she’ll only believe in things as
> long as there’s no proof at all. Well, I wouldn’t expect anything else from
> someone whose father runs The Quibbler.”[^20210513-1]

When reading this keep in mind that this is filtered through [[Hermione]].
While it looks fairly harsh, PercabethHinny noted in _Discovering the Truth_
that Hermione *might* be misrepresenting Ginny's actual words (emphasis
mine).[^20210513-2]

[^20210513-3]: Mrs. J. K. Rowling. _Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix_
    Kindle Locations 2746-2749. Pottermore Limited. American Kindle Edition. 
[^20210513-2]: PercabethHinny. 
    _[Discovering the Truth](https://www.wattpad.com/story/51615824-discovering-the-truth-harry-potter)_
    Last Updated: 2019-05-22. Last Viewed: 2021-05-13. 

[^20210513-1]: Mrs. J. K. Rowling. _Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix_
    Kindle Locations 3858-3860. Pottermore Limited. American Kindle Edition. 

- - -

> Hermione’s face was glazed with tears, but Ginny was no longer crying. She met
> Harry’s gaze with the same hard, blazing look that he had seen when she had
> hugged him after winning the Quidditch Cup in his absence, and he knew that at
> that moment they understood each other perfectly, and that when he told her
> what he was going to do now, she would not say, “Be careful,” or “Don’t do
> it,” but accept his decision, because she would not have expected anything
> less of him.[^211101-3]

Sure Ginny offers a slight argument just below this, but [[Harry]] pretty much
nails it - she *does* know him, and so she *does* accept _**and**_ *understand*
his thought process and thus decision.  She is no more happy about it than he
is, but they two of them are in sync with each other at this moment in time. 

[^211101-3]: Mrs. J. K. Rowling.
    Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince
    p. 537. Pottermore Publishing. American Kindle Edition. 

### Speculation

The interaction across book five is such that I do not think that Ginny and
[[Luna]] had a strong friendship going into the book, but we do not have enough
data to tell if her familiarity with [[Luna]] is solely from (at that point)
three years of being in class with her, or if it pre-dates that. 

The books do not say, but I think it had to have been Ginny that invited [[Luna]] to
the meeting about organising the defence study group in _the order of the
Phoenix_.  [[Hermione]] certainly would not have done so, she has been behaving
very in a very hostile manner to [[Luna]].

