[[!meta title="Hogwarts Class Schedule Impossibility"]]
The class schedules pretty much must be intended more as a plot device
than any serious attempt at sitting down and figuring out how to schedule
classes for four houses across seven years with only one teacher per
subject. Any number of people have tried to figure this out, and I've
seen a few claim to make work, though I do not have any of their results
on hand.  Still, a number of the problems should be self-evident if you
pay any attention to detail at all. ChokolatteJedi wrote over 18 thousand
words across 3 chapters trying to make sense of the schedules[^20200629-1]
in what looks like a fairly well researched work that outlines most of
the holes, problems, and inconsistencies.

I can accept that taking five electives on top of a course load that
theoretically kept students well occupied for 2 years might over work
and stress out even the best student.  There might well be good reason
for limiting most students to two of three electives.  That being said,
it boggles my mind that [[Hermione]] would be scheduled in _three_ classes
for first period Monday morning.  One of two things is happening here.
Either, as I said, the schedule is a total plot device and the three
classes are on top of each other simply to make [[Hermione]]'s schedule
obviously insane, or some of the classes actually have two sessions
per year, and McGonagall has purposefully put [[Hermione]] in an "odd"
session, perhaps attempting to make it less obvious that she is taking
overlapping classes.

Of the two of these, the former, that it is purely a plot device actually
makes more sense. Originally I argued this from a career requirements and
Gryffindor class selection basis. It was a decent argument, but there
is in fact a better that I had missed. [[Hermione]]'s exam schedule is the
final bit of proof you need to demonstrate that third year Gryffindors
are extremely limited without a time turner.

You can also make an argument from Bill and Percy's twelve
OWLS.[^20210315-1] However, 1) we do not *know* that neither had a time
turner, Percy is irritable enough to have had one; 2) you can argue that
[[Hermione]], while very intelligent in some ways, shows incredible immaturity
in others and that this may be the key difference between her lack of
success at taking all the electives; and 3) we do not know that it is
required to take the class to take the test. You may be able to sign up
for OWLS in classes you did not take. The fact that [[Hermione]] does not
do this is not proof positive that it is not allowed - she might well
consider doing so "cheating" the way she considers the use of
[[Snape's|adults/Snape]] notes in the margins cheating in _the Half-Blood
Prince_.[^20210315-2]

[[Hermione]]'s schedule has a conflict between Charms and Ancient Runes exam
times.[^20200629-5] We know from [[Ron]]'s inspection of her schedule on the
first day of class that there she has overlapping times for Divination,
Muggle Studies, and Arithmancy.[^20200629-6] Now, at least seven of
the other Gryffindor students take Divination and Care of Magical
Creatures. The latter is shared with the Slytherins, but the former
appears to be dedicated to them. Either way, those two time slots have
no conflict with the core classes everyone has to take.

Because none of the other seven named Gryffindor third years are known to
take Muggle Studies, Arithmancy, or Ancient Runes, we are unsure if there
_is_ a normal Gryffindor time slot for them.  We do not know what classes
Sophie Roper or Lily Moon[^20200706-1] take as they are nearly entirely
unmentioned in the books, but even if there was no interest (other than
[[Hermione]]) that year, the time slots should be available because that
should not be consistent from year to year. Still, you could argue that
Hogwarts, for some truly bizarre reason, has no standard schedule and that
the staff reinvents it each year.  In such a case, with only one student
interested, they may have … neglected to schedule some time slots.
It is a viable argument, but ridiculous.

[^20200706-1]: I know Fay Dunbar is the prototypical name for a Gryffindor
    girl. See my [[Notes]] on [[Hogwarts]] for why I am using these names.
		I pretty much have to pick between using a video game
		name or using a name from a note sheet.

You could try to say that it has to be variable because interest is
variable but while Divination seems to be a dedicated class, Care of
Magical Creatures is not, and yet both have every single named Gryffindor
in them. In fact, it is implied (but not stated) that most if not all
Slytherin students took Care of Magical Creatures as well. So we have
no problems with doubling up houses for the electives.	My guess is that
all electives are always doubled up, and that either we just do not hear
about the other house in Divination, or that for whatever reason no one
from that house is interested in Divination.

So assuming there is a normal time slot, there must be a way for a
Gryffindor student to take Ancient Runes.  The exam obviously cannot
conflict with a core class everyone is required to take. [[Hermione]]'s
exam does.  The options are that the (again) that the schedule is a
plot device, or that [[Hermione]] is in some other house's Ancient Runes
class. Given my guess that all electives are doubled up, there are two
Ancient Runes sections, one for Gryffindor and x, and the other for y
and z.	While the Gryffindor Ancient Runes roster is between one and
three (depending on our two extra girls), we have no reason to think
that the size of the class in x is equally small to justify dropping
the time slot for lack of interest.

Since Divination, Muggle Studies and Arithmancy are all on top of each
other, none of these three conflict with Ancient Runes.  Thus there is
no reason to shift her Ancient Runes class to another house's time slot,
doing so would in fact make the situation worse, not better, given how
tightly stretched the teachers are - the other house's time slot is almost
certainly going to conflict with something else she is supposed to be in.

So the time turner is necessary because no student can take any two of
Muggle Studies, Divination, and Arithmancy. This is confirmed because
by dropping two of these, she no longer needs it. However, despite no
longer needing it fourth year and beyond, she would still need it third
year simply to attend both Charms and Ancient Runes, neither of which
should have needed a time turner to allow her to attend the other three.

The excessive number of schedule conflicts are present because 1) they
increase the mystery 2) it lets [[Hermione]] be super intelligent without
informing [[Harry]] of anything 3) it provides reasons for her and [[Ron]]
to fight.

[^20200629-5]: Mrs. J. K. Rowling. _Harry Potter and the Prisoner
    of Azkaban_ (p. 323). Pottermore Limited. American Kindle Edition.

[^20200629-6]: Mrs. J. K. Rowling. _Harry Potter and the Prisoner
    of Azkaban_ (pp. 101-102). Pottermore Limited. American Kindle
    Edition.

[^20200629-1]: ChokolatteJedi.
    _[Meta about Hogwarts Class
    Schedule](https://archiveofourown.org/works/17908985?view_full_work=true)_
    <https://archiveofourown.org/> Last Viewed 2020-06-29

[^20210315-1]: Mrs. J. K. Rowling.
    _Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets_
		p. 46; Location 607 of 4470. Pottermore Limited. American
		Kindle Edition.

[^20210315-2]: Mrs. J. K. Rowling.
    _Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince_
		Pottermore Limited. American Kindle Edition. Exact
		citation needed.

[[!tag "HP Notes"]]
