[[!meta title="Dumbledore and Tom Riddle"]]

[[!toc levels=3 startlevel=3]]

### Riddle's School Years

Dumbledore was transfiguration teacher when he first met [[Tom Riddle|Riddle]]
in the summer of 1938.[^20210927-5] We do not know if he was as yet Deputy
Headmaster.  I find it interesting that Dumbledore's reaction to [[Riddle]] is
to pretend to light his wardrobe on fire.  His idea of the way to persuade a
young boy to reform is to threaten to destroy all the boy owns.  The message is
clear: behave because I am more powerful than you are.  The verbal message is
equally clear: behave, or we will exclude you from our society and leave you to
your poverty.  

The second is *absolutely typical* of how an Englishman would treat an orphan in
the 1800s.  Given Dumbledore is born in 1881,[^20210927-6] he is in that sense
very much a man of his time.  It is the first that is curious.  There is no
attempt to educate [[Riddle]] in morality, no sympathy for the lack of role
models in his life, no carrot, all stick.  It is very different from the way
that Dumbledore will later deal with [[Draco]], but is very reminiscent of the
way that Dumbledore will refuse to explain why [[Harry]] should respect
[[Snape]] except that [[Harry]] should obey.  

Dumbledore claims to have kept a close eye on young Tom,[^20210927-7] and yet
observed nothing as Tom searched for and found the Chamber of Secrets, opened
it, and terrorised the school.  It was only after Myrtle Warren[^20210927-8]
died that [[Riddle]] felt that he was being watched.[^20210927-9]  This
contradiction has lead some to speculate that a more evil Dumbledore than I can
account for intentionally moulded [[Riddle]] into a dark lord.[^20210927-10]
Perhaps because he felt that society needed an enemy, perhaps because he thought
that [[Riddle]] could be more/better controlled than turned out to be the case,
perhaps because he wanted the fame of defeating a second dark lord.  As I said,
a Dumbledore that evil is not particularly compelling to me.  My personal
thought is that despite what he would later tell [[Harry]], Dumbledore *did not*
watch [[Riddle]] all that closely those first few years.  Dumbledore may not
have *trusted* [[Riddle]]'s apparently good behaviour, but he was complacent.
He thought that he had sufficiently intimidated [[Riddle]] and allowed his
vigilance to slacken.  It took Miss Warren's death to awaken Dumbledore to his
responsibilities, and only *then* did he actually watch [[Riddle]].  Dumbledore
feels no need to give [[Harry]] insight into his own failings, and so claims to
have done more/better than was really the case.  He watched [[Riddle]] closely
enough that it would never again be safe to open the chamber.  If he had watched
[[Riddle]] consistently as he claims, then [[Riddle]] could never have had the
opportunity to cause that death.  One less horcrux to have been made, perhaps
even no opportunity to learn of them at all.[^20210927-11]

How much of the failure to investigate Miss Warren's death is on Dumbledore?
How much of it is on Headmaster Dippet, how much on the nature of Hogwarts, the
traditions and laws that make it quasi-independent from the Ministry?  How much
is on the fact that Miss Warren came from a fully non-magical family?  This is
before the defeat of Grindelwald, so Dumbledore had a fraction of the influence
he would latter have.  I am inclined to blame the lack of investigation here on
forces and situations that pre-date Dumbledore.  He did not help the situation,
but in this one instance, he did not create it. 

### Before the First Fall

[[Riddle]] graduates, works for an unknown amount of time as a purchasing agent
for Borgin and Burke, then disappears.  He returns sometime in the late 1960s,
already in command of the Death Eaters,[^20210927-12] for a doomed interview for
the DADA position.  Dumbledore intimates that he knows much of what [[Riddle]]
has been up to.  Why does he not act?  We do not know what power Dumbledore has
in the [[Wizengamot|Culture]] or the [[International Confederation of
Wizards|ICW]], but we do know that he has been nominated for Minister of Magic
three times.  His official power may be unknown, his *unofficial* stature is
already quite great, in British society, the latter may actually be more
important.  This is particularly relevant because Dumbledore will stand up the
Order of the Phoenix and act outside the law.  If he is willing to do so, then
he can be held accountable for failing to do so soon enough or effectively
enough.  If you are going to break the law, and worse lead others to do so, make
it mean something.  That is not perfect morality, but being a vigilante *and
failing* seems to me worse than saying that you were forced to take the law into
your own hands because the government was too corrupt, to penetrated by the
Death Eaters, to be effective. 

### The Prophecy

The immediate rebuttal is that it does not matter that Dumbledore did not act,
because [[Harry]] will be subject of a prophecy stating (effectively) that
Dumbledore lacks the power to defeat [[Riddle]].  This argument has no weight.  

Firstly, it has no weight because the prophecy has not happened yet.  Dumbledore
is failing to act not because he knows that someone else is the only one who
can, but for some other reason.  We do not know if it is fear, agreement with
[[Riddle]]'s goals, a mis-guided sense that [[Riddle]] can be redeemed, or what.
We only know that Dumbledore is failing to act when he, as yet, has no reason
for holding back.  

Secondly, even after hearing the prophecy, Dumbledore tells us that the prophecy
only has the power that we give it.[^20210927-13]  Mrs. Rowling, speaking
outside the books, confirms that prophecy does not have some cosmic force of
fate, but rather acts as a goad, triggering actions, but not forcing behaviour.

> If neither boy was 'pre-ordained' before Voldemort's attack to become his
> possible vanquisher, then the prophecy (like the one the witches make to
> Macbeth, if anyone has read the play of the same name) becomes the catalyst
> for a situation that would never have occurred if it had not been
> made.[^20210927-14]

Dumbledore realises that both [[Riddle]] and [[Harry]] could have ignored the
prophecy; the corollary is also true, though less intuitive: *Dumbledore is not
bound by it either.*  If prophecy need not come true,[^20210927-15] then
Dumbledore could have done more than battle to a standstill, he could have truly
spared [[Harry]].  

### Summation

It is in *this* light that we must question why the war
dragged on for eleven years before [[Riddle]]'s first defeat.  Why, knowing that
[[Riddle]] would return, Dumbledore does *nothing* to investigate how or why
[[Riddle]] avoided death.  Why, learning about the [[horcuruxes]] in [[Harry]]'s
second year, Dumbledore waits until the summer after [[Harry]]'s *fifth* year to
hunt them down.  Why, knowing that he will die, he entrusts the knowledge to
[[Harry]] and gives him no adult to confide in.  Why he allows him to confide in
[[Hermione]] and [[Ron]] who can help little, but not in [[Lupin]],
[[Kingsley]], or [[Moody]] who might have truly helped.  

[^20210927-14]: Mrs. J. K. Rowling.
    "[F.A.Q.: About the Books](https://www.rowlingindex.org/work/faq1web/)"
    [The J.K. Rowling Index](https://www.rowlingindex.org/)
    Publication Date: 2004-05-15 to 2007-12-21. Last Viewed: 2021-09-27.

[^20210927-15]: Mrs. J. K. Rowling.
    _[Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1.Harry_Potter_and_the_Half_Blood_Prince)_
    pp. 423-424. © 2005 Pottermore Publishing. American Kindle Edition. 


[^20210927-13]: Mrs. J. K. Rowling.
    _[Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1.Harry_Potter_and_the_Half_Blood_Prince)_
    p. 425. © 2005 Pottermore Publishing. American Kindle Edition. 

[^20210927-12]: Mrs. J. K. Rowling.
    _[Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1.Harry_Potter_and_the_Half_Blood_Prince)_
    p. 369. © 2005 Pottermore Publishing. American Kindle Edition. 

[^20210927-11]: old-crow.
    _[An Inconvenient Truth](https://www.fanfiction.net/s/5084287)_
    [Chapter 9](https://www.fanfiction.net/s/5084287/9/An-Inconvenient-Truth)
    Published: 2009-05-24. Updated: 2016-06-22. Last Viewed: 2021-09-27. 
    Speculation that [[Riddle]] learned about [[Horcruxes]] from the Chamber of
    Secrets. 

[^20210927-10]: citation needed.  

[^20210927-9]: Mrs. J. K. Rowling.
    _[Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/15881.Harry_Potter_and_the_Chamber_of_Secrets)_
    p. 312. © 1999 Pottermore Limited. American Kindle Edition.

[^20210927-8]: [Harry Potter Wiki](https://harrypotter.fandom.com).
    "[Myrtle Warren](https://harrypotter.fandom.com/wiki/Myrtle_Warren)"
    Last Edited: 2021-08-05. Last Viewed: 2021-09.27. 

[^20210927-7]: Mrs. J. K. Rowling.
    _[Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1.Harry_Potter_and_the_Half_Blood_Prince)_
    p. 301. © 2005 Pottermore Publishing. American Kindle Edition. 

[^20210927-5]: [Harry Potter Wiki](https://harrypotter.fandom.com).
    "[Tom Riddle](https://harrypotter.fandom.com/wiki/Tom_Riddle)"
    Last Edited: 2021-09-22. Last Viewed: 2021-09-27.

[^20210927-6]: See my [[History]] notes.

