[[!meta title="Arabella Figg"]]
[[!tag "HP Adult"]]

Every fanfiction author who attempts to deal with the problem of Harry's home
situation has to account for Arabella Figg.  What, exactly, was her role?
Different authors have different takes on this, and much of the answer depends
fairly heavily on how they interpret [[Dumbledore]].  We ultimately have a few
possibilities:

* If [[Dumbledore]] is aware of how bad things are
	* [[Dumbledore]]'s instructions on when to report are focused on external
	  threats.  She is not to report on internal threats.
	* Arabella reports things regularly, but like most adults, is so locked into
	  trusting [[Dumbledore]] that she does nothing else. 
	* Arabella reports things regularly and is massively upset that nothing
	  happens, but as a squib, she has no recourse to the magical government and
		whatever it is that prevents other, normal, adults from noticing something
		is wrong with [[Harry]]'s living situation also prevents her from
		effectively alerting the non-magical government.
	* Arabella is complicit in making things bad on [[Dumbledore]]'s orders.
* If [[Dumbledore]] is not aware of how bad things are
	* Arabella reports things regularly, but [[Dumbledore]] discounts her
	  reports.  See above on her status as a squib.
	* Arabella is complicit in making things bad, and [[Dumbledore]] is wrong to
	  have trusted her with this mission.
	* Arabella is herself not aware of how bad things are.
		* Arabella is an old lady from a by-gone era who does not consider Harry's
		  experiences worthy of intervention.
		* Arabella is not mentally capable of noticing things are problematic.
		* Arabella shares with the rest of the wizarding world a certain
		  cluelessness about non-magical fashion and so does not realise that
			Harry's clothing is odd.  The Dursleys successfully hide their abusive
			behaviour from the neighbourhood.  Arabella does not understand why Harry
			has the reputation he does, but does not associate that reputation with
			deliberate malice on the Dursley's part.  In other words, she is in part
			taken in by their act, and in part hopelessly naive.[^20210831-1]

[^20210831-1]: This view is taken by r2r4l in 
    _[Yet Another Harry Potter Goes To Hogwarts Story (YAHPGTHS)](https://www.fanfiction.net/s/10789352)_
		Published 2014-10-29. Updated: 2015-09-24. Last Viewed: 2021-08-31.
