[[!tag "HP Notes"]]
[[!meta title="Doubting Harry's Character"]]

> The office dissolved but re-formed instantly. Snape was pacing up and down in
> front of Dumbledore. 
> 
> “— mediocre, arrogant as his father, a determined rule-breaker, delighted to
> find himself famous, attention-seeking and impertinent —” 
> 
> “You see what you expect to see, Severus,” said Dumbledore, without raising
> his eyes from a copy of Transfiguration Today. “Other teachers report that the
> boy is modest, likable, and reasonably talented. Personally, I find him an
> engaging child.” 
> 
> Dumbledore turned a page, and said, without looking up, “Keep an eye on
> Quirrell, won’t you?”[^20210901-1]

This passage has bothered me over and over again, beyond what I can fully
justify and well beyond what I can support with canonical references.  

It basically comes down to two facts.  

The first is the common saying, commonly misattributed to Joseph Goebbels, "If
you tell a lie big enough and keep repeating it, people will eventually come to
believe it."  This is not the only place we hear Snape claiming that Harry is "a
determined rule-breaker," "arrogant", or "attention-seeking."  Indeed these
claims will come up over and over again.  

The second fact is that the teachers *do* treat Harry oddly.
[[Dumbledore|adults/Dumbledore]] claims they find him "modest," and "likeable"
but [[McGonagall|adults/McGonagall]] will have no trouble believing that he has
lured both Malfoy and Neville out of bounds after hours, *and found it funny.*
That is so at odds with his actual personality, that, as I note when I discuss
her character, one wonders who exactly she is punishing.  [[Professor
Sprout|adults/Sprout]] will also have no trouble believing that this "modest"
boy was so "attention-seeking" that he put his own name into the Goblet of Fire
- hence she treats him coldly after his name comes out.[^20210901-2]  Note, that
is before the first Skeeter interview, so it is not the lack of media attention
on Cedric that is at fault. 

You can even find examples where [[Dumbledore|adults/Dumbledore]] may be showing
some signs of suspicion. Yes, each of these can be explained away as trying to
gain [[Harry]]'s trust, going through the motions of being impartial, or
similar.  The point is that the above passage is from *very early* in
[[Harry]]'s first year, probably before Halloween, else
[[Dumbledore|adults/Dumbledore]] would know that [[Snape|adults/Snape]] is
already keeping a close eye on Quirrell.  How many times can even
[[Dumbledore|adults/Dumbledore]] hear how arrogant [[Harry]] is before it begins
to, at least a little, influence his thinking?  Especially when we know that
[[Dumbledore|adults/Dumbledore]] was *particularly* concerned that [[Harry]]
grow up away from fame and the ego it would engender?  

In the series that starts with _[Harry Potter: Lost][B12HPL1]_, Bear12 portrays
a universe in which the magical world thinks that [[Harry]] has died, and a
young boy who thinks of himself as "Adam Winters" comes to [[Hogwarts]] as a
homeless orphan.[^20210901-3]  As the series progresses, this version of
[[Dumbledore|adults/Dumbledore]] picks up on every single way in which "Adam"
\([[Harry]]\) resembles a young [[Tom Riddle|adults/Riddle]], sometimes even
only remotely.  This makes [[Dumbledore|adults/Dumbledore]] suspicious.  In the
"real" series, the "real" [[Harry]] also resembled [[Tom Riddle|adults/Riddle]]
in some key ways.  Add in [[Snape|adults/Snape]] effectively (though
unconsciously, since I do not think [[Snape|adults/Snape]] knows who [[Tom
Riddle|adults/Riddle]] became) emphasising those similarities …

[^20210901-1]: Mrs. J. K. Rowling. 
    _[Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/136251.Harry_Potter_and_the_Deathly_Hallows)_
    p. 280. Pottermore Publishing. American Kindle Edition. 

[^20210901-2]: Mrs. J. K. Rowling. 
    _[Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/6.Harry_Potter_and_the_Goblet_of_Fire)_
    better citation needed. 

[^20210901-3]: Bear12. _[Harry Potter: Lost][B12HPL2]_
    Published 2009-09-10. Updated: 2009-11-02. Last Viewed: 2021-09-01. 

[B12HPL1]: https://www.fanfiction.net/s/5366780

[B12HPL2]: https://www.fanfiction.net/s/5366780

